The Joe Rogan experience. The Sandra bland case. Um,
how does that one fit in? Because that one,
that the girl was pulled over the cop was
T she was failure to signal, right? I mean, it's a thing. It's a thing.
And she started lighting cigarettes. He told,
told her to put the cigarette out and it all escalated from that.
She said she doesn't have to put the cigarette out. And then he's says,
he's got a lighter up, um, he's screaming at her. He pulls her out of the car.
He rests her.
And then is there controversy about whether or not she committed suicide in
jail? There is. I don't get into that, uh,
because it seemed, that seemed unlikely.
That she was killed that.
Yes, it seemed likely that she was killed versus she committed suicide.
I didn't think that someone would commit suicide being in jail for three days,
especially one of the things that you highlighted in the book,
and you actually played in the audio version of it,
her little sort of affirmations, you know, and she was,
she sounded very positive and upbeat and calling everybody Kings and Queens,
and it was thanking God and being very thankful and being
aware of, of life and, uh,
humility and just graciousness and gratitude.
It didn't seem, I mean,
obviously you don't know what kind of dark things can happen to a person when
they're incarcerated for three days for a reason.
Like how maybe that's the straw that broke the camel's back. But she did.
Have, you know, she had a, uh, a complicated, um,
emotional history. She had previously, I tried to commit suicide. Um,
and she'd had, she was emerging from a,
quite a difficult period in her life and went to Texas to start a new
leaf. And so there is an interpretation, like I said,
I don't really have strong feelings on this particular part of the story,
but there's an interpretation that says here's a woman who's emerged from
very difficult period in her life goes, leave shoes. She was in Illinois.
She drives half across the country to start over.
And on the first day that she arrives in Texas to start over,
she gets pulled over by a cop. And by the way,
she had thousands of dollars in outstanding, uh, tickets.
So she had a history of this stuff with cops where, you know,
the same trap that many poor people in this country get into,
which is they get the police use, um, uh,
uh, uh, people as an ATM, right. They like set them off on trivial things.
And when they can't find when the campaign to find they get another fine.
And when you know how that goes, she was part of in that trap.
So here she is trying to start over. After difficult time gets first day,
she gets to Texas, she gets pulled over again and she, in her mind,
it's the same. She's like, oh my God, I tried to start over. And I can't,
and then she's in jail and she can't make bail. And, you know,
there's a scenario where you can see that she just began to despair.
Don't they take away your shoelaces and, and do.
Yeah. Are they doing things by the book? I mean, I find the whole thing about,
I went to that town when I was reporting the book and,
you know, the it's kind of hard to be,
to kill, to kill someone and get away, get away with,
it requires a level of expertise in forethought that struck me
was not present in that little town in Texas. I mean, a serious crime.
It's just not, I don't, they're not like, did not think in this,
these are not people playing chess. Right. I think they
encountered it with this cop and he's not very good at his job.
And he gets way over his head and he completely misreads her and he
pulls her off to jail, public, deeply regrets, the whole incident.
And they're all embarrassed and sitting around and hoping it'll just all go
away. And meanwhile,
she's all alone in a prison cells spiraling deeper and deeper into
depression. I mean, it's, I think it's almost more tragic, um, um,
that she committed suicide. She committed suicide. It's insane.
That you can keep someone in jail for three days for failure to signal.
It seems like there should have been an initial review of the circumstances that
led to her getting pulled out of the car in the first place.
And the cops should've been fired immediately. They just said, look,
you're screaming at her because she lit a cigarette. Yeah.
Well, this is fascinating. And I feel like,
I don't know you and I are probably the same age. There's this? So the cops 29,
if you grew up with cigarettes,
you have a different understanding of the meaning of lighting a cigarette.
So what's happening in the encounter is he pulls her over.
What he does is he sees her coming out of this university campus.
And while she's still on campus property, she rolls through a stop sign.
And then he notices that she's got out of state plates and she's a young black
woman and she's driving a Hyundai, like not a, not a Mercedes-Benz.
And he thinks, huh, I'm gonna check this out. So he,
she pulls onto the road and he drives up behind her
aggressively. He speeds up behind her. So what does she do? Well,
what any of us would do? She gets out of the way thinking, oh, he's,
he's going to, he's going to, you know, the scene of an accident or something.
I better get out of his way. She pulls over to get out of his way. And he goes,
oh, you didn't use your turning signal. And he pulls him,
pulls her over and pulls a minor. Now, by the way,
whenever I hear a fire department, truck,
or a police car coming, and I pull over to get out of the way,
I do not use my turning signal. Right.
You just get out of the way it's reflexive.
So her immediate thought is what he does is, is like, oh, this is.
Eddie tricked me. And he knows what he's doing. That's exactly what he wanted.
He wanted to get her in a situation. Cause it's all a pretext he just wants.
He thinks, oh, maybe there's something weird with her. So then he,
we have this all on tape, of course, because this is,
and this is one of the incidents that was captured entirely on the dash cam,
the officer's dash cam, it goes up to the window and he says,
uh, he looks at her and he realizes she's agitated. Why? Because she's off.
And he goes, memes, there's something wrong. And she's like, well, you know,
I want to know why I'm bill over Bula.
And then he goes back to his car and he comes back to her.
And he later says in the deposition that when he goes back to his,
to his, uh, vehicle to check on her license and registration,
he begins to develop suspicions that she's up to no good she's got drugs or
guns.
And so she comes back and it commenced to have this increasingly heated
conversation.
And she lights the cigarette because she's trying
to calm herself down. And this is my point.
You and I who grew up in an era where people smoked all the time,
know that one of the principle functions of lighting a cigarette was to calm
your nerves. And in her mind, I think in her mind,
she's trying to signal to the cop. Let's deescalate this.
And I'm one of the ways I'm going to show you that I want to deescalate.
This is I'm going to take a moment and light a cigarette and
just take it down a notch and let's have a real conversation.
He doesn't understand the meaning of that gesture. And he thinks, oh, she,
he thinks several things. He thinks one she's messing with me.
She's defying my authority by lighting a cigarette.
She's going to blow smoke in my face or something, you know, nefarious,
or she's going to like take the light cigarette and put it out of my,
he has all these kind of weird, crazy fantasies.
This is what he said in his deposition. Oh yeah. He, so even on the level,
I try and identify in the book all of the different ways.
And this is when I come back to the case at the end of the book,
I go through this in more detail,
all the different ways in which he completely misunderstands her.
And one of them is he doesn't understand the meaning of letting a cigarette in a
moment of tension. Um, and that's, you know,
still more evidence why you need,
if you're a cop or anyone dealing with a stranger,
you need to slow down and jot,
not jump to any conclusions because there's so much you can miss.
What it seemed to me when I listened to it initially.
And then I listened to it again in your audio book,
there's a thing that happens with police officers.
And I've never been a police officer,
but I was a security guard for a brief period of time.
And I recognized it in myself.
And I recognized in a lot of people that I work with is that you start treating
the other people like the other, like it's us and them.
It was us. I worked at, uh, great, uh, great woods.
It's a performance center in Mansfield, Massachusetts like this.
And we would catch a lot of people, smuggling booze in things like that.
And there was an attitude that you got,
and I was only there for one summer, but there's an attitude of, they were,
they were the bad people and you were the good guys. It was us and them.
And we stuck together and they weren't us and cops get
that a hundred times worse because there's guns involved and they can get
shot at.
And we've all seen videos of gun cops pulling people over and he says,
can I see your hands please? And the guy pulls out a gun and shoots out them.
We've all seen those videos. Those are real.
This is all always in the back of the mind of cops. Yeah.
And I think that was just a guy who, as you said,
29 years old is a young guy. He's not that bright,
not good at communication.
And he is this attitude that he's a cop and that you have to listen to the
cops cause he's them. And you're you.
And that that's like when he's telling her to put the cigarette out and she's
saying, I don't have to do that. And he's saying, get out of your vehicle.
And she's saying, I don't have to do that. And then he's screaming at her.
I mean, that's, that's all right there. I mean, so it seems like to me,
he wants compliance. He wants her to listen.
He does. Yeah, he does what he gets. It's funny.
The what's remarkable about that tape,
which I must've seen 50 times. Um,
and which has been viewed on YouTube, you know,
even a couple million times is how quickly it escalates.
The whole thing is it's insanely short. You,
you would think if I was telling you the story of this, you would think, oh,
this unfolds over 10 minutes and it doesn't,
it unfolds over a minute and a half. Um, and that, when I remember years ago,
I wrote, uh, uh, my second book blank and I have in that book,
a chapter about a very famous infamous police shooting in New York case of
Amadou Diallo. Remember that,
remember that one would be shot like 40 times by cops.
And one of the big things I was interested in, uh,
talking about in that case was how long does it take?
How long did it take for that whole terrible sequence to go down?
So from the moment the police develop it, uh,
suspicions about Amadou Diallo to the moment that I'm going to Dell was lying
dead on his front porch. How long,
how much time elapsed and the answer is like two seconds. It's boom, boom, boom.
It's like, and I had a conversation with I'm actually here in the valley with,
uh, uh, Gavin de Becker. Um, was he ever been on your show? No. Oh,
fascinating guy.
And we were security experts, security experts. Incredibly interesting guys.
Friends with Sam Harris. I know that. Yes. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Um,
and he was talking about this question of time that when you're a security
guard, guarding someone, you know, famous,
a lot of what you're trying to do is to inject time the scenario,
instead of you don't want something to unfold in a second and a half where you
have almost no time to react properly,
or what you want to do is to allow it to unfold in five seconds.
If you're going to add, I'm making this up, I can't remember his exact term,
but basically what your job is, is to add seconds into the,
the encounter so that you have a chance to intelligently respond to what's
going on. And so he was hit this great riff about, um,
how good Israeli, uh, uh,
secrets secret service guys are. And one of the things they do is they're,
they're, uh, they're either not armed or they don't,
they're trained not to go for their weapons.
And he situations because his point is so say you're guardian to precedent.
You're a body man, but the president, you walk it through a crowd.
Somebody comes up to you like pulls a gun, wants to shoot the president.
His point is if you're the secret security guy and your first instinct in
response to someone pulling a gun is to go for your own gun.
You've lost a second and a half, right? Your hands got to go down to your,
your whole focus is on getting to your own gun. And in the meantime,
the other guy whose gun's already out has already shot. You've lost.
You need to be someone who forgets about your own gun and just focuses on
the, on the man in front of you, right. And protected the president.
But it was all in the context of time,
is this really crucial, um,
variable in these kinds of encounters and everything as a police officer,
you should be doing is slowing it down. Um, wait,
uh, you know, analyze what's happening. And that's what he doesn't do.
The competence instance speeds it up, right? He goes to Def con you know,
she lights a cigarette and within seconds he screaming at her. This is a,
you know, a parent shouldn't do that. I mean,
let a little police officer by the side of the highway.
The differences he knows she's not a criminal. I mean, he,
he must know it's.
He's pulling her over because he's trying to write a ticket and the way he's
communicating with her, when she lights a cigarette, it's like, she's inferior.
Like he, this is not someone who's scared.
He's not scared of a perpetrator is not scared that there's a criminal in the
car about to shoot him. He's not scared of that at all. He wants utter,
total complete compliance. And he's talking to her like,
like he's a drill Sergeant, but Kent.
You can't, both those things be true. How so? Well in that,
so in the deposition he gives,
which I get to the end of the book and I got the tape of the deposition is it's
totally fascinating. It's like,
he's sitting down with the investigating officer, uh, in, uh,
looking into the death of Sandra bland. And he's got,
I don't know how long it is two hours.
And he's walking them through what he was thinking that day.
And he makes the case that he was terrified that he was
convinced. He, he says, he goes back to his squad car.
He comes up and as summit, there's some evidence to support this.
So he pulls her over and he goes to the passenger side window and leans
in and says, ma'am you realize why I pulled you over and blah, blah, blah,
and Z. Okay. Cause he, she doesn't seem right to him. She gives him her license.
He goes back to his squad car and he says, while he's in the squad car,
he looks ahead. And he sees her making what he calls furtive movements.
So he's like.
Furtive movements. Also. He sinks.
She's being all kind of jumpy. And you don't know, he isn't. He just says,
I saw her moving around in ways that didn't make me happy.
And then when he returns to the car, he returns driver's side,
which is crucial because if you're a cop, you go driver's side.
Only if you think that you might be in danger, right? He doesn't,
if you go driver's side, you're exposing yourself to the road.
The only reason you do that is that when your driver's side,
you can see the it's very, very difficult.
If someone has a gun to shoot the police police officer, who's pulled them over.
If the police officer is on the driver's side, right.
You have an angle if they're on the passenger side. So why does he go?
If he thinks she's harmless? There's no reason for him to go back driver's side.
I think this guy, I think these two things are linked. I actually believe him.
He constructs this ridiculous fantasy about how she's dangerous,
but I think that's just what he was trained to do. He's a paranoid cop.
And then why is he so insistent that she be compliant for the same
reason? Because he's terrified. He's like, do exactly what I say.
Cause I don't know what the what's going to happen here. Right. And she's, I,
you know, I, I don't know. I, I don't think those two, uh,
those two strains of, uh, of interpretation are mutually exclusive. Hmm.
That's interesting. It didn't sound like he was scared at all.
It sounded like he was that she wasn't listening to him. Yeah. I didn't,
I didn't think he sounded even remotely scared. I felt like he had,
I mean, we're reading into it.
Right, right. I have no idea. But from.
My interpretation was he had decided that she wasn't listening to him
and he was going to make her listen to him. That's what I got out of it.
I didn't get any fear.
And I thought that version of it that he described just sounds like horseshit.
It sounds like what you would say after the fact to strengthen your case.
Well, the, so there's another element here. Did I get into,
which is I got his record as a police officer. So it'd been on the,
on the forest for, I forgot nine, 10 months.
And we have a record of every traffic stop he ever made.
And when you look at his list of traffic stops,
you re you realize that what happened that day with Sandra bland,
it was not an anomaly that he's one of those guys who pulls over everyone for
reasons hold along. So I think I forgotten exact number, but in the hour,
before he pulled over Sandra bland, he pulled over four people,
four other people for equally ridiculous. He's that cop.
And he's that cop because he's been trained that way. Right?
That's kind of quotas, strain, strain of modern policing,
which says go beyond the ticket, pull someone over. If you,
if anything looks a little bit weird because you might find something else. Now,
if you look at his history as a cop, he almost never found anything else.
His history is a cop. In fact, I went through this,
I forget how many hundreds of traffic stops he had in nine months.
If you go through them, he has like,
once he found some marijuana on a kid and by the way,
the town in which he was working as a college town. So I mean, how hard is that?
Uh, I think he found a gun once misdemeanor gun, uh,
but everything else was like pulling over people for, you know, the, uh,
the light above their license plate was out.
That that's the level of stuff he was using.
He did this all day long every day.
So he's like to him, it's second nature. Yeah. Pull her over.
Like who knows what's going on? She's out of state. She's young black woman.
Was this comparable to the way the rest of the cops in the force in his division
did it.
Well, I looked at, I didn't look at the rest of the cops on his voice.
What I looked at were, uh,
state numbers to the wherever there several American states give us
like North Carolina, for example, will give us, um, precise,
um, uh,
complete statistics on the number of traffic stops done by their
police officers and the reasons for those stops. So when you look at that,
so I have the, I look at the North Carolina numbers, for example,
in the North Carolina highway patrol,
it's the same thing they're pulling over unbelievable numbers of people and
finding nothing like night, you know, 1% less than 1% hit rates.
In some cases of being hit red, being, finding something of interest.
So like they're pulling over 99 people for no reason,
or to find one person who's got, you know,
a bag of dope or something in the car.
You cannot conduct policing in,
in a civil society like that.
And expect to have decent relationships between law enforcement and the civilian
population.
Yeah, no question. But doesn't that sort of support the idea that he's full of,
that he was really concerned that she had something he'd never encountered
anything.
Well, or, or this was the one,
the fantasy in his head is so what, so the question is,
why does he keep doing it? If this is a guy who day in day out,
pulls over people for no reason and finds nothing and continues to do it.
Now there's two explanations.
One is he's totally cynical and thinks this is the way to be an effective police
officer X mission.
Number two is this is a guy who has a powerful fantasy in his head.
That one day I'm going to hit the jackpot.
I'm an open the trunk and is going to be 15 pounds of heroin.
And I'm going to be the biggest star, whoever lived.
I think there's also a rush of just being able to get people to pull over this,
the compliance thing, which is another reason why he was so furious.
She wasn't listening to him and she kept a cigarette lit.
Yeah. Or she was listening, but not complying. Yes.
Yeah. Um, w what are the laws, I mean,
are you allowed to smoke a cigarette in your car when a cop pulls you over?
How's it work like that? Yeah.
I mean, of course, yeah. It can't stop you from engaging.
The kids tell you to put out your cigarette. There's no law that.
He could have said. I mean, no, there's no law. I mean, the two things,
the courts historically give enormously way to the police officers
in a traffic stop, as opposed to a person to person stop. But, uh, but no,
I mean, this is about what he should've said is he could've said,
um, ma'am do you mind, um,
I would prefer if you put out the cigarette while we're talking,
or I'm allergic to smoke or whatever, I mean,
there's a million ways for him to do it nicely. He's a about it.
But he's, I mean, he's basically doing the job, like a,
he's doing a version of being a cop.
So this is, so this is one of a really,
really crucial point in the argument of the book, which is,
I think the real lesson of that case is not that he's a bad cop. He's in fact,
doing precisely as he is, was in trained and instructed to do he's,
uh, he's the ideal cop. Um,
and the problem is with the particular philosophy of law enforcement that has
emerged over the last 10 years in this country,
which has incentivized and, um,
encouraged police officers to engage in these incredibly
low reward activities like pulling over a hundred people or to find one person
who's caught something wrong that has become enshrined in the strategy of many
police forces around the country. They tell them to do this.
I have a whole section, a book, right. Go through in detail.
One of the most important police training manuals, um, uh,
which is, you know,
required reading for somebody coming up and which they just walk you through
this. Like,
it is your job to pull over lots and lots and lots and lots of people.
Even if you only find something in a small percentage of cases,
why that's what being a proactive police officer is all about. Right?
So they are trained to that phrase, go beyond the ticket is a,
is a term of art in police training. Like you gotta be thinking, you show,
you pull them over for having a taillight that's out, but you're look,
you're thinking beyond that.
Is there something else in the car that's problematic?
That's what you're trying to find. So there,
he was being a dutiful police officer and the,
the answer is to re-examine our philosophies of law enforcement.
Not to not, I mean, you can't dismiss this thing by saying, oh,
that's just a particularly bad cop. It's not great,
but I don't know if he's any worse than, you know,
he's just doing what he was trained to do.
That's the issue should be trained to do them in deference.
Right. That is the issue, right? The issue is there.
This is practice to treat citizens that are doing nothing wrong
as if they're criminals and pull them over and give them extreme paranoia and
freak them out. Yeah. I have to find something. Boom.
I'm Canadian. And I was home in Canada,
small-town Canada a couple weeks ago. And I saw in the pack,
you know how these cars always have,
they're often had a slogan on the side of the car, the back of the car.
So in my little hometown, in Southwestern, Ontario, sleepy, you know,
farm country, the,
the slogan on the back of the police cars is people helping people,
right? So Canadian, right?
And like the extent I understand that this is a country with very,
very low levels of gun ownership,
which means that a police officer does not enter into an encounter with a
civilian with the same degree of fear or paranoia that the civilian has a
handgun. Right. Which is a big part of this,
regardless of how one feels about gun laws in this country.
The fact that there are lots of guns mean makes the job of a police officer a
lot harder. And every police officer will tell you that in Canada,
that you don't have that fear, but it's also Canada and it's small town, Canada.
And so when you encounter a police officer in my little town, he's like,
he's people helping people, right? He's like, he's like driving like a Camry.
And he's, you know,
he's like this genial person who was a really Camry means I forgotten exactly
what the drive. They're not, they're not driving.
Cars. Yeah. Explorers.
Painted black with like big bull bars at the front. Right. Uh,
and then you.
Go, you know, you go, I mean.
Even in LA, here in LA, like the cars are painted black and white.
It's really, they look for rochus. I mean, is that what it is?
They look for OSHAs too. They just look,
they identify as police to connect to a Canadian. Looks.
To me, it looks a little, why do they have.
To pay it up? Black forgot stuff. They open Raiders. I mean, it's like.
What do you think they should pay them something mild and like bright, yellow,
something lovely, something lovely. Like.
A nice, can you imagine it like a teal or green?
Well, that would be, yeah,
because there's a lot of black cars and a lot of white cars,
not a lot of teal cars, so it would, yeah. It would stand out like, oh,
it's a cop. Is pink car. Well, you know, this kind of symbolism.
Matters. Right. You're projecting an image.
Joe Arpaio, who makes all of his prisoners wear pink. Yeah. Yeah.
That's kind of a thing. Well, I mean the two against his point though,
how many women shoot cops? Isn't that an insanely low number?
Yeah. I mean, insanely low. I mean, w w what are the numbers? I mean,
it's probably almost nonexistent. Yeah. Guys pull over women.
I don't think they're worried about being shot. I really don't.
I think it's horse. I think it's all after the fact,
he was trying to concoct some sort of an excuse I.
Was going to excuse for. Um, is he still on the force?
I know he he's either.
He's kicked off for, I forgotten the precise language they used,
but for basically being impolite to a civilian.
But, um, yeah, I don't think there's a lot of, um, uh, but I don't know whether,
I mean, I still think we're saying the same thing,
which is the thing that's driving him. His motivation is not rational.
Right. And if you were a rational actor,
you would never engage in an activity where 99.9% of your police stops,
resulted in nothing. Right.
He's he is often some weird kind of fantasy land for a
reason, which is, that's what, in certain jurisdictions in this country,
that's what law enforcement has come to look at. Right. Like, um, and that's,
that's problematic. It's a huge problem.